TLDR:
APSC169 Research Course Project
Developed a semi-autonomous treatment system combining existing membrane filtration systems and lime precipitation technologies to target heavy metals in low-pH abandoned mine effluent
Modelled contaminant behaviour, chemical dosing, and pH adjustment for a theoretical >96% removal efficiency in heavy metals; conducted economic analysis projecting $61M net present value over 5 years

REFLECTION:
The proposed solution addressed a way to purify contaminated water run off originating from abandoned mining operation located in the Pacific Northwest.

In Canada alone, the estimated costs of cleaning up Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) from abandoned mines range between two to five billion dollars annually. Without government intervention AMD would slowly begin acidifying freshwater pH, culminating in the death of aquatic life, the harm of those who rely on the land, and the passing on of heavy metal poisoning into the very foods we eat.

Because no liable figures can be held accountable for the leakage of abandoned mines, the only way our solution would make financial sense is if it was funded by the government—in other words, our solution had to appeal to the government by lowering the costs associated with treating AMD in the long run. Moreover, because tens of thousands of abandoned mines exist, our solution had to be fairly autonomous so that the implementation wouldn't be a logistical nightmare.

After brainstorming novel solutions and all existing solutions. The two most enticing existing solutions that fit our aforementioned criteria were Membrane and Precipitation technologies—in large part due to the semi autonomous nature of these processes. Membrane technologies allowed incoming effluent to be cleaned by simply passing it through a filter, however ridiculous amounts of energy were required to pressurize the incoming flow such that it'd pass through the membrane filter. Similarly, precipitation technologies allowed heavy metals to dissolve out of AMD upon reaching a certain pH, however all current applications of the such revolved around large scale active mining plants. So we combined and modified these two existing solutions to give us our proposed solution. Instead using nanofilters which contain superfine pores but also high pressures, we opted for an ultrafilter with larger pores but low pressures. Though the larger pores allowed heavy metals to flow past the membrane, when combined with precipitation technologies, these metals would dissolve out the water and clump up such that their diameter would become bigger than the pores on our ultrafilter.

Though this design project was very tedious, I believe it helped enhance both my technical and interpersonal skills. Regarding technical skills, this is the first time I've tried my hand at solid works, and gaining that experience by modelling alternate solution designs was very fun. Moreover, though I've written large reports of this caliber myself, having to do so in a two week turn around time really put my research and consolidation skills to the test, near the end of the project I feel as if I can more easily sift through information online. As for interpersonal skills, I've learnt the importance of compromise and effective communication, particularly when group mates had varying levels of motivation—in essence, I've learnt how to bring the best out of some people, such that the project doesn't solely rely on myself, as I have the tendency to be controlling over a project and discourage others from contributions.
